Elon Musk wades into China and Taiwan tensions

Beijing and Taipei have spoken out after Tesla chief executive Elon Musk said Taiwan should become a special administrative zone of China.

The world's richest man said in a Financial Times interview he believed the two governments could reach a "reasonably palatable" arrangement.

China's ambassador to the US praised Musk but his Taiwanese counterpart said freedom is "not for sale".

Taiwan rules itself but Beijing claims it as part of its territory.

Last week, Mr Musk also drew criticism for posting a Twitter poll with his suggestions for ending the war between Russia and Ukraine, including Kyiv giving up territory to Moscow.

Mr Musk's comments come as the electric car maker hit a monthly record for sales in China.


Messages reveal how Musk and Twitter boss fell out

Messages between Elon Musk and Twitter boss Parag Agrawal have been published in a court filing.

They reveal how the pair's relationship, after a good start, went dramatically south.

In late March, it became clear that Elon Musk was interested in purchasing shares in Twitter - and potentially sitting on Twitter's board.

On 27 March, Parag Agrawal reaches out: "Hey Elon - great to be connected directly. Would love to chat," he says.

Elon Musk likes the message. "Perhaps tonight around 8?" he says. So far so good.

By 31 March, a hastily planned dinner is arranged near San Jose as the deal really starts heating up.

The speed of developments is clearly exhilarating for Mr Agrawal. The world's richest person is about to become a Twitter board member. Mr Agrawal tells Mr Musk he's "excited" to see him in person.

Bret Taylor, Twitter's board chair, texts Musk about the dinner. "I think they were looking for an Airbnb near the airport and there are tractors and donkeys," he says in a text. The location, he continues, "wins for the weirdest place I've had a meeting recently".

The dinner goes well despite the farmyard location. "Memorable for multiple reasons. Really enjoyed it", Mr Agrawal says.

A few days later it's announced that Elon Musk is to join the board.

"Super excited" Mr Agrawal messages.

As the announcement goes public, all sorts of names begin to text Mr Musk.

Podcaster Joe Rogan asks Mr Musk whether he is going to "liberate Twitter from the censorship happy mob".

"I will provide advice, which they may or may not choose to follow," Mr Musk replies.

On 5 April, Jack Dorsey, former chief executive of Twitter, tells Mr Musk that Mr Agrawal is an "incredible engineer", but that Twitter's board is "terrible".

By 7 April, Mr Agrawal and Mr Musk are burnishing their coding credentials - the start of a seemingly beautiful working relationship.

"I wrote heavy duty software for 20 years," Mr Musk says. "I interface way better with engineers who are able to do the hardcore programming than with program manager/MBA types".

Agrawal replies: "In our next convo - treat me like an engineer instead of a CEO and let's see where we get to."

"You got it", Mr Musk replies.

But then disaster.

On 9 April, Mr Musk tweets asking why so few of Twitter's most followed accounts tweeted very much. "Is Twitter dying?" he asks.

