Elon Musk, Twitter and the mysterious X app

It was beginning to feel like Elon Musk and Twitter were locked in an eternal dance.

And then it came to an abrupt end - for now at least - with a short, succinct letter from Musk's lawyers to Twitter's, which announced that he intended to buy the firm after all, and an enigmatic tweet from Musk himself to his 107 million followers about creating "X, the everything app".

The dance began in April 2022. Musk bought up some Twitter shares and was invited to join its board. He initially accepted, and then declined. Then came the first bombshell - he wanted to buy the whole platform instead.

Twitter went into defensive mode and tried to prevent him from becoming a majority shareholder. Then he offered a $44bn takeover package - more than the firm was worth - and its investors pushed for it to go ahead.

Twitter accepted. Then, bombshell number two: Elon Musk argued that the company's estimation of the amount of spam and bot accounts on the platform was inaccurate. Both parties dug in their heels.

This has never been resolved - and led to Musk saying he was pulling out. But it is important - because if Twitter really is bloated with stuff that isn't real, that makes it a much smaller and less attractive proposition than it may appear.

Courtroom drama
There was speculation that Musk's offer had been made impulsively, and his plan to finance the deal, which involved selling off some of his shares in his electric car firm Tesla, had made investors in that company nervous, forcing him to look for an exit strategy.

In less than a fortnight's time, the two warring parties were due to face each other in court because by this point, Twitter had done its own U-turn and wanted to force the sale through. There was a $1bn termination fee at stake for either party if it walked away.



The fight, which was scheduled to go to trial 17 October, saw the two sides face off in lengthy court filings, private messages and bitter public spats on Twitter, where Mr Musk has more than 100 million followers.

Messages reveal how Musk and Twitter boss fell out